Is there a substantial influence of complex traits on CpG levels, what might be considered a reverse causal effect? We conducted MR of 140 traits against 350k DNA methylation levels.

Traits related to mortality, adolescent growth rate and age at menarche, cigarette consumption, IgG and IgA levels, and subjective well being appeared to have systematic methylome-wide influences, indicated by lambda-GC values > 1.05.

There were 3254 associations between 34 complex traits and 2431 CpGs where p-values where below 1e-9 (Bonferroni adjustment for multiple testing)

These could be driven by large outlying effects e.g. in the MHC, or other violations of MR.

First we tested to see, if exposures were instrumented by both MHC and non-MHC loci, whether there was systematic difference in the effect estimates. Of the 80 trait - CpG associations for which MHC and non-MHC instruments were used, 96% of MHC and non-MHC effect estimates had the same sign. However we found that the agreement was close to half for the CpGs influenced by age of menarche, indicating that these associations are likely driven by non-specific large MHC effects.


# Reverse MR

We analysed 122 traits for causal effects on approximately 350000 CpG levels using two-sample Mendelian randomisation (2SMR), where each trait was instrumented using SNPs obtained from their respective previously published GWASs. For traits with a single genetic instrument we obtained Wald ratios as putative causal effect estimates. For traits with multiple genetic instruments, for each effect estimate of the trait on a CpG we used inverse variance weighted (IVW) analysis to obtain an overall causal effect estimate from all instrumenting SNPs. 

The smallest p-value for the analysis of body mass index on CpG levels was 2.27e-6, which did not withstand multiple testing correction, and the genomic inflation factor was lambda_med = 0.95, suggesting that should naturally higher BMI have widespread effects on the methylation levels in blood they were not detectable with a sample size of around 30,000 samples. However, restricting the genomic inflation estimate to 187 CpGs known to associate with BMI from EWAS [28002404] indicated a strong enrichment of low p-values (lambda_median = 3.95). A similar pattern was found for triglycerides, in which genome-wide lambda_median = 0.94 but the 10 CpGs known to associate with triglycerides from EWAS [28194238] had a combined fisher's p-value of 8.3e-70. 

We found 40 traits showing at least one association with a CpG at p < 1.4e-7. Of these traits, 19 were instrumented by a single SNP. Two traits, IgA nephropathy and immunoglobulin G index levels were instrumented by a single SNP in the MHC region, and the reliability of these SNPs as instruments is low because of extended LD in the region. There were 1446 putative trait-CpG associations arising from the remaining 17 traits. Several neurological traits appeared to have shared genetic effects with multiple CpGs including intracranial volume, subjective well being and depessive symptoms. The MR Steiger directionality test indicated that the majority of these associations were in the direction of the trait to the CpG. 

There were 238 trait-CpG associations obtained from the IVW analysis at p < 1.4e-7, comprising 21 traits.  We exclude 81 of these associations due to being instrumented by SNPs only in the MHC region. Of the remaining 157 associations, 144 involved 14 traits that were instrumented by both MHC and non-MHC SNPs. In order to evaluate the reliability of these results we compared the causal effect estimates of SNPs outside the MHC region with causal effect estimates from SNPs within the MHC region. The agreement of causal estimates from MHC and non-MHC SNPs was very high for ulcerative cholitis, rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, LDL cholesterol, percent emphysema, birth weight, red blood cell count, multiple sclerosis, celiac disease, all showing that over 85% of the causal directions were concordant. 


